This is the September 2011 release of the ModENCODE dataset.

ModENCODE is a National Human Genome Research Institute-led project to
identify all of the sequence-based functional elements in the
Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster genomes. Full
information can be found at http://www.modencode.org.

Please be aware that some of the datasets contained at this site are
embargoed, which means that while you are free to use them, you may
not publish genome-wide analyses using the data until their embargo
period has passed or certain other conditions apply.  Full details can
be found at modENCODE_publication_policy.pdf, located in this
directory or ftp://ftp.modencode.org/modENCODE_publication_policy.pdf.

To find out the embargo date for a particular data set, please go to
http://intermine.modencode.org and search for the data set by its
accession number (modENCODE_XXXX) or dataset name. This site will also
provide you with information on the protocols, conditions and other
metadata associated with the data set.

Layout of the FTP Directory
---------------------------

Each dataset is present in two places: in flattened format under
"all_files", where the data are arbitrarily divided among multiple
volumes, and in this directory organized in hierarchical fashion under
top level directories named after the species. The hierarchical
organization of the directories is as follows:

 Level 1 -- Species name, e.g. "D.melanogaster"
     Level 2 -- Genomic element type, e.g. "Histone-Modification"
         Level 3 -- Technique, e.g. "ChIP-seq"
	     Level 4 -- File format, e.g. "coverage-graph_wiggle"

The data files themselves can be found below the level 4
directory. They are symbolic links to the real data files located in
"all_files".

File Names
----------

As ModENCODE consortium members complete experiments, they submit
their data files to the Data Coordinating Center (DCC). These files
usually bear internal names that are meaningful to the originating
lab, but are cryptic to the rest of the world. The DCC does not change
the names of the files or their contents, EXCEPT that we periodically
lift genomic coordinates to the latest stable genome build, currently
WS220 for C. elegans and R5 for D. melanogaster. These
minimally-modified files are located in the directories between
"all_files". Note that some of the files contain the names of the
genome builds they were originally mapped against, such as WS170, but
all such files (including .sam files) have been lifted to the current
stable build. The exception to this rule is a number of C. elegans
files that had not been lifted at press time, the list of which can be
found in UNLIFTED.txt. These files are being updated.

To make the data easier to work with, the names used in the
symbolic links located under species-name directories use a uniform,
if verbose, naming system, as follows:

alr-1:Developmental-Stage=Larvae-L2-stage#Strain=OP200#temperature=20-degree-celsius:\
      ChIP-seq:Rep-1:ChIP:WS220:modENCODE_3156:1.fastq.gz

The name has been line-broken for readability. The "\" is not part of
the filename.

There are 8 components to the name, separated by the ":" character:

  1) Name of the biological target, such as a transcription factor or
     histone modification type. For transcriptome studies, it will be
     "mRNA", "whole-RNA", "small-RNA", etc.

  2) Key experimental conditions, including developmental stage,
  strain, and cell line. The condition names are separated from the
  values by "=" signs, and the condition name/value pairs are
  separated by "#" marks.

  3) Experimental technique, such as ChIP-seq.

  4) Replicate number, in the format Rep-1, Rep-2, etc.

  5) For ChIP experiments, the role of the dataset, either "Input" or
  "ChIP" for distinguishing no-antibody control from antibody IP. In
  the case of tiling arrays, this field will also contain the
  dye used, such as Cy3, in order to distinguish dye-swap experiments.
  
  6) The accession number of the submission, in the format
  modENCODE_XXXX.

  7) Additional distinguishing characters, such as the part number in
  multi-part submissions, followed by the format and compression.

NOTE ON FILENAME SIZE: The uniform file names are never longer than
255 characters, which is the limit on most filesystems. However, there
are a handful of common filesystems that cannot accomodate files
longer than 150 characters. On such filesystmes, you may be unable to
download and open these files. The workaround is to download or unpack
the files on another filesystem, such as a thumb drive or the /tmp
directory, then copy them to the desired destination under a shorter
name.

MANIFEST.txt and metadata.csv
-----------------------------

These two files, contained within this directory, provide additional
information about each file. 

MANIFEST.txt is a three-column tab-separated file that maps ModENCODE
accession numbers to their files names. The three columns are:
MODENCODE_ACCESSION,ORIGINAL_FILENAME,UNIFORM_FILENAME. The original
and uniform filenames match the filenames located under "all_files"
and the species-specific directories as described above.

metadata.csv is a longer tab-separated file that includes all the
information in MANIFEST.txt, as well as additional metadata:

 Column  Name              Description
 ------  ----             -----------
   1     DCC id           Abbreviated ModENCODE accession number, the
         	          numeric portion only.

   2     Original name    Original filename as submitted by the
                          experimental laboratory

   3     Uniform filename File renamed to the uniform filenaming
                          system described earlier.

   4     File format      Description of the file format, see below.

   5     Organism         Species name.

   6     Target           Biological element, such as "TF factor"

   7     Technique        Experimental technique, such as ChIP-chip

   8     Factor           Major experimental factor assayed, such as the
   	                  name of the transcription factor.

   9     Stage            Developmental stage of the organism, if
                          applicable.

  10     Condition        Other conditions applicable to the
                          experiment.

  11     ReplicateSetNum  Replicate number, in format Rep-1, Rep-2...
  
  12     Build            Genome build used for coordinate mapping.

  13     Principal Investigator   PI last name and first initial.
 
  14     Category         Broad category of the experiment, such as 
                          "RNA expression profiling"

File Formats Used
-----------------

The following standard file formats are used in this repository:

 1) FASTQ. This format, distinguished by the extension .fastq,
 contains raw sequence read base calls and their quality scores.
 The format is described here: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format

 2) CEL.  This format, distinguished by the extension .CEL, is used
 for Affymetrix tiling arrays. It is described here:
 http://www.stat.lsa.umich.edu/~kshedden/Courses/Stat545/Notes/AffxFileFormats/cel.html

 3) PAIR. This format, distinguished by the extension .pair, is used
 for Nimblegen arrays. It is best described in the Nimblegen user's
 guide, Appendix A:
 http://www.nimblegen.com/products/lit/expression_userguide_v5p0.pdf

 4) SAM. This format, distinguished by the extension .sam, was
 developed for next generation sequencing and combines
 sequence alignments, sequence read data, base quality scores, and
 alignment quality scores. Documentation and libraries for woking with
 it can be found at http://samtools.sourceforge.net/.

 5) WIGGLE. This format, distinguished by the extension .wig, was
 developed by the UCSC Genome Browser staff
 for representing continuously variable quantitative values
 mapped to the genome. ModENCODE uses it extensively to describe the
 results of ChIP experiments. The wiggle format is described at:
 http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/wiggle.html

 6) GFF3. This format, distinguished by the extension .gff3, is used
 to represent interpreted features on the genome, including gene
 models, transcription factor binding peaks, and histone modification
 enriched regions. It is described at:
 http://www.sequenceontology.org/gff3.shtml

This Site is Cloud Enabled!
---------------------------

This site runs completely off the Amazon EC2 cloud, using disk volumes
that have been made available as public snapshots. You can easily
mount a mirror of this site and have direct access to the data files
without needing to download them to your local computers. Please see
http://data.modencode.org/modencode-cloud.html for details. 

For Assistance
--------------

Please contact the helpdesk at help@modencode.org. Your inquiries will
be answered within 24 hrs during the working week.

--

Last modified: 22 September 2011
